Adds specification of default query and response handling (#1000)
zonemaster/zonemaster: docs/specifications/tests/DNSQueryAndResponseDefaults.md

document defines the default "setting" of a DNS query and the default handling
of "setting" in the DNS response. The meaning of "setting" here will be clear
from the specification below.

## Application of this specification

This specification applies to all [test case specifications][Test Cases] that has
an explicit reference to this document.

## Default setting in *DNS Query*

A *DNS Query* has the following default setting. A test case specification can
refer to a *DNS Query* with one or several changes to the setting items.
Specifically, the test case specification must always specify query name and
query type.

|Setting Item |Default value |Comment                         |
|:------------|:-------------|:-------------------------------|
|Protocol     | UDP          |                                |
|OpCode       | "query"      | Always "query" in a query      |
|QR flag      | unset        | Always unset in a query        |
|AA flag      | unset        |                                |
|TC flag      | unset        |                                |
|RD flag      | unset        |                                |

> |RA flag      | unset        |                                |

Reviewer: Do we ever set the RA flag in queries?

Author: No. It has no meaning in a query, as far as I know. Possibly it could be set to see the behavior of a name server.

* [Default setting in *DNS Query*](#default-setting-in-dns-query)
* [Default setting in *EDNS Query*](#default-setting-in-edns-query)
* [Default setting in *DNSSEC Query*](#default-setting-in-dnssec-query)
* [Default handling of a *DNS Response*](#default-handling-of-a-dns-response)
* [Default handling of an *EDNS Response*](#default-handling-of-an-edns-response)
* [Default handling of a *DNSSEC response*](#default-handling-of-a-dnssec-response)

## Overview

Almost all [test cases] emit DNS queries and react to the responses. This
document defines the default "setting" of a DNS query and the default handling
of "setting" in the DNS response. The meaning of "setting" here will be clear
from the specification below.

## Application of this specification

This specification applies to all [test case specifications][Test Cases] that has
an explicit reference to this document.

## Default setting in *DNS Query*

A *DNS Query* has the following default setting. A test case specification can
refer to a *DNS Query* with one or several changes to the *Parameters*
overriding the default values. If a *Parameter* is specified as "fixed" (with a

> "X" in that column) then the default value cannot be overidden.

Reviewer: `a "X"` -> `an "X"` (there are more of these)

|AD flag       | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|CD flag       | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|RCODE         | -                                        |       | Defined in test case |
|Query name    | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|Query type    | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|Query class   | Require value to be same as in the query |       | Normally "IN"        |
|EDNS          | ignore                                   |       |                      |

* Check against query name and query type is, by default, done against the values
  in the query, not in the response.
  
* When fetching records from the answer section, these are the default criteria:
  * Only records matching the query name and the query type are fetched. Any
    RRSIG records meeting the next criterium are also fetched.
  * RRSIG records with the same query name and covering the query type are
    fetched.
  * CNAME records are ignored unless the query type is CNAME.

> * When the test case specification states that CNAME chains are to followed in

Reviewer: `to followed` -> `to be followed`

the default handling from a *DNS Response* except for the response items
specified below. Unless specified in the test case specification, the items in
the response are handled using the default handling.

|Response Item |Default handling             | Comment                                                        |
|:-------------|:----------------------------|:----------------------- ---------------------------------------|
|EDNS          | Take note if OPT is missing | Further actions to be specified in the test case specification |

## Default handling of a *DNSSEC response*

A *DNSSEC response* is a response to a *DNSSEC Query*. A *DNSSEC Response*
inherits the default handling from a *EDNS Response* except for the response
items specified below. Unless specified in the test case specification, the items
in the response are handled using the default handling.

|Response Item |Default handling                       | Comment                                                            |
|:-------------|:------------------------------------- |:-------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | EDNS DO flag | Issue a message if DO flag is missing | Set to DEBUG level unless specified in the test case specification |

Reviewer: Maybe update this to `Take note` also?

Author: Fixed.

|CD flag      | unset        |      |                              |
|RCODE        | "NoError"    | yes  |                              |
|Query name   | -            |      | Must be defined in test case |
|Query type   | -            |      | Must be defined in test case |
|Query class  | "IN"         | yes  |                              |
|EDNS         | no           |      | No OPT record is included    |

## Default setting in *EDNS Query*

An *EDNS Query* inherit the default setting from a *DNS Query* except for the
setting items specified below. If a *Setting Item* is specified as "fixed" then
the default value cannot be overidden.

A test case specification can refer to an *EDNS Query* with one or several
changes to the setting items.

|Setting Item          |Default value        |Fixed |Comment |
|:---------------------|:--------------------|:-----|:-------|
|EDNS                  | OPT record included | yes  |        |
|EDNS UDP Message size | 512                 |      |        |
|EDNS Extended RCODE   | no                  |      |        |
|EDNS Version          | 0                   |      |        |
|EDNS DO flag          | unset               |      |        |

> |EDNS Z lag            | unset               |      |        |

Reviewer 2: typo: lag -> flag

Author: Fixed.

|EDNS0 Option          | none                |      |        |

## Default setting in *DNSSEC Query*

An *DNSSEC Query* inherit the default setting from an *EDNS Query* except for the
setting items specified below. If a *Setting Item* is specified as "fixed" then
the default value cannot be overidden.

A test case specification can refer to an *DNSSEC Query* with one or several
changes to the setting items.

|Setting               |Default value |Fixed |Comment |
|:---------------------|:-------------|:-----|:-------|
|EDNS DO flag          | set          | yes  |        |

## Default handling of a *DNS Response*

A *DNS Response* is a response to a *DNS Query*. Unless specified in the test

> case specification, the items in the response is handled as listed. If a

Reviewer 3: "is handled" -> "are handled"

*Response Item* is specified as "fixed" then the requirement in default action

> must be successful for the response to be considered to be a valid DNS response.

Reviewer 2: suggestion: could you  rephrase the last sentence? (using `default action` seems confusing because it does not refer to any part of the following array)

> If a *Response Item* is specified as "fixed" then the default handling must be successful for the response to be considered to be a valid DNS response.

Author: Rephrased. Please re-review.

|QR flag       | Require flag to be set                   | X     |                      |
|AA flag       | -                                        |       | Defined in test case |
|TC flag       | Re-query over TCP if set                 |       |                      |
|RD flag       | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|RA flag       | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|AD flag       | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|CD flag       | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|RCODE         | -                                        |       | Defined in test case |
|Query name    | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|Query type    | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|Query class   | Require value to be same as in the query |       | Normally "IN"        |
|EDNS          | ignore                                   |       |                      |

* Check against query name and query type is, by default, done against the values

>   in the query section in the query, not in the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  in the question section in the query, not in the response.
```

  
* When fetching records from the answer section, these are the default criteria:
  * Only records matching the query name and the query type are fetched. Any
    RRSIG records meeting the next criterium are also fetched.
  * RRSIG records with the same query name and covering the query type are
    fetched.
  * CNAME records are ignored unless the query type is CNAME.

> * When the test case specification states that CNAME chains are to be followed in
>   the the answer section, these are the default criteria for the chain to be
>   fetched:

Reviewer: Since there are two defaults in play here I suggest we make that clear from the text.

```suggestion
* When the test case specification states that CNAME chains are to be followed,
  the default handling is to look for a valid CNAME chain in the answer section
  and fetch all CNAME records in that chain.
  These are the default criteria for a CNAME chain to be valid:
```

  * The last record in the chain must either be a CNAME or a record matching the

>     query type.

Reviewer: So what happens if a response contains a CNAME chain that's invalid? Are those CNAME records simply ignored?

And if there is a valid CNAME chain in the response but also some extra unrelated CNAME records, are the records of the valid CNAME chain to be considered by the test case and are the extra CNAME records to be ignored?

>     query type.

Author: Good questions.

> So what happens if a response contains a CNAME chain that's invalid? Are those CNAME records simply ignored?

Yes, unless the test case specification says anything else.

> And if there is a valid CNAME chain in the response but also some extra unrelated CNAME records, are the records of the valid CNAME chain to be considered by the test case and are the extra CNAME records to be ignored?

Yes, unless the test case specification says something else.

I added that the there must only be one CNAME record per owner name.

>   * The first CNAME in the chain must match the query name.

Reviewer: Is any CNAME that matches the query name by definition the first one in a chain, or does "first" refer to the order in which the records are laid out in the answer section? This should be clear from the text.

Author: > Is any CNAME that matches the query name by definition the first one in a chain, 

The first CNAME record in a chain is one that no other CNAME record's RDATA points to. The last CNAME record i the chain is one whose RDATA does not point to a CNAME record (but possibly to a non-CNAME record).

> or does "first" refer to the order in which the records are laid out in the answer section?

Records are unordered in the answer section, at least no special order is required by RFC 1035. (The only RR type that requires order, as far as I know, are TSIG records that must be last in the additional section.)

> This should be clear from the text.

Or assumed to be known? I have update the text somewhat.

* Authority and additional sections are by default ignored.

## Default handling of an *EDNS Response*

An *EDNS response* is a response to an *EDNS Query*. An *EDNS Response* inherits
the default handling from a *DNS Response* except for the response items
specified below. Unless specified in the test case specification, the items in

> the response is handled using the default handling.

Reviewer 3: "is handled" -> "are handled"

|Response Item |Default handling                   | Comment                                                            |
|:-------------|:----------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------|

> |EDNS          | Issue a message if OPT is missing | Set to DEBUG level unless specified in the test case specification |

Reviewer: Do we specify the values for the tag, testcase and module attributes of these messages anywhere? I believe it would be better if we gathered up these kinds of checks into a special kind of test case with a proper name. If you like I can create an issue for that so we don't have to deal with it now?

Author: The idea was to have something in the "logs" if the OPT record was missing against expectation,  but I realize that it is probably to go beyond the purpose of this document. I have updated and removed the "automatic" debug message.

Yes, please create an issue.

|Response Item |Default handling             | Comment                                                        |
|:-------------|:----------------------------|:----------------------- ---------------------------------------|

> |EDNS          | Take note if OPT is missing | Further actions to be specified in the test case specification |

Reviewer: There's something wrong with the formatting here.

Author: Fixed.

## Default handling of a *DNSSEC response*

A *DNSSEC response* is a response to an *DNSSEC Query*. A *DNSSEC Response*
inherits the default handling from a *EDNS Response* except for the response
items specified below. Unless specified in the test case specification, the items

> in the response is handled using the default handling.

Reviewer 3: "is handled" -> "are handled"

Author: Fixed.

A *DNS Query* has the following default setting. A test case specification can
refer to a *DNS Query* with one or several changes to the *Setting Items*
overriding the default values. If a *Setting Item* is specified as "fixed" then
the default value cannot be overidden.

|Setting Item |Default value |Fixed |Comment                       |
|:------------|:-------------|:-----|:-----------------------------|
|Protocol     | UDP          |      |                              |
|OpCode       | "query"      | yes  |                              |
|QR flag      | unset        | yes  | Always unset in a query      |
|AA flag      | unset        | yes  |                              |
|TC flag      | unset        | yes  |                              |
|RD flag      | unset        |      |                              |
|RA flag      | unset        | yes  |                              |
|AD flag      | unset        |      |                              |
|CD flag      | unset        |      |                              |
|RCODE        | "NoError"    | yes  |                              |
|Query name   | -            |      | Must be defined in test case |

> |Query type   | -            |      | Must be defined in test case |

Reviewer 4: In the current code, there is a default value "A". For readibility reason we took the habit to specify it in the implementation of TC, but it exists.

Author: This document specifies the defaults etc for the specifications to be used by the implementation. I see no reason to have A as the default query type. It is better if the query type is always spelled out. The implementation can still have that as the default query type, but A queries are less common than SOA queries, I think. I guess that having A as default is a transfer of the way `dig` and `nslookup` behaves.

> |Query class  | "IN"         | yes  |                              |

Reviewer 4: Perhaps that "class"  should not declare as a "fixed" value. Although we use "IN" in the current TC specified, I think we should not "fix" it for future usage.

Author: I really do not see the use case of other class than "IN", but I have updated the specification to make "IN" the default instead of fixed. Please re-review.

|OpCode        | Require value to be "response"           | X     |                      |
|QR flag       | Require flag to be set                   | X     |                      |
|AA flag       | -                                        |       | Defined in test case |
|TC flag       | Re-query over TCP if set                 |       |                      |
|RD flag       | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|RA flag       | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|AD flag       | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|CD flag       | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|RCODE         | -                                        |       | Defined in test case |
|Query name    | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|Query type    | ignore                                   |       |                      |
|Query class   | Require value to be same as in the query |       | Normally "IN"        |
|EDNS          | ignore                                   |       |                      |

> * Check against query name and query type is, by default, done against the values

Reviewer 3: For better readability, maybe change the "response item" values (i.e., query name, query type, etc) in the text below to be in italic for example? Or double quoted.

Author: Updated.

Reviewer 3: Missing italic for "query name" and "query type" on line 112.

Author: When I read this again, I feel I have to check the wording of this sentence.

Author: Updated wording.

  in the question section in the query, not in the response.
  
* When fetching records from the answer section, these are the default criteria:
  * Only records matching the query name and the query type are fetched. Any

>     RRSIG records meeting the next criterium are also fetched.

Reviewer 3: Criterium -> Criterion

Author: Updated.

  * RRSIG records matching *Query Name* and covering *Query Type* are
    fetched.
  * CNAME records are ignored unless *Query Type* is CNAME.

* When the test case specification states that a CNAME chain is to be followed,
  the default handling is to look for a valid CNAME chain in the answer section
  and fetch all records in that chain. The records in the chain are arranged in
  the logical order. These are the default criteria for a CNAME chain to be
  valid:
  * The first CNAME in the chain must match *Query Name*.
  * The last record in the chain must either be a CNAME or a record matching
    *Query Type*.
  * For each owner name of the CNAME records in the chain there must not be any
    additional CNAME records in the answer section (only one CNAME record per

>     owner name).

Reviewer: I'm curious about an edge case here. Let's say we're following a CNAME chain and the query name is example.com. The answer section contains the following CNAME records:
```
error.com    3600  IN  CNAME  example.com
example.com  3600  IN  CNAME  other.com
```
The way I read the specification there's one chain in the answer section, and the first CNAME is error.com, which is different from the query name, so none of these records should be fetched. Is that the intended behavior?

I believe the "The first CNAME in the chain must match Query Name." item should be removed from the list of criteria and added as a definition instead.

Author: > I'm curious about an edge case here. Let's say we're following a CNAME chain and the query name is example.com. The answer section contains the following CNAME records:
> 
> ```
> error.com    3600  IN  CNAME  example.com
> example.com  3600  IN  CNAME  other.com
> ```
> 
> The way I read the specification there's one chain in the answer section, and the first CNAME is error.com, which is different from the query name, so none of these records should be fetched. Is that the intended behavior?

Yes.

> I believe the "The first CNAME in the chain must match Query Name." item should be removed from the list of criteria and added as a definition instead.

I disagree, but I will change the wording somewhat to make intended behavior clear.

## Default setting in *DNS Query*

A *DNS Query* has the following default setting. A test case specification can
refer to a *DNS Query* with one or several changes to the *Parameters*
overriding the default values. If a *Parameter* is specified as "fixed" (with an
"X" in that column) then the default value cannot be overidden.

|Parameter    |Default value |Fixed |Comment                       |
|:------------|:-------------|:-----|:-----------------------------|
|Protocol     | UDP          |      |                              |
|OpCode       | "query"      | X    |                              |

> |QR flag      | unset        | X    | Always unset in a query      |

Reviewer 2: Why specify here in the comment that the parameter is unset since it is already fixed to `unset`?

Author: To underline that fact.

Author: It is just a comment. The choice of the other fixed, and default, values could also be commented, but I have not done that.

Author: Removed.

  * CNAME records are ignored unless *Query Type* is CNAME.

* When the test case specification states that a CNAME chain is to be followed,
  the default handling is to only follow a CNAME, and fetch the records, if the
  CNAME chain is valid.
  * The chain is, by default, considered to be valid if the following criteria
    are met:
    * It must be possible to arrange all CNAME records from the answer section

>       into a contiguous logical chain with a posisble addition of a non-CNAME

Reviewer 2: typo: `posisble` -> `possible`

Author: Fixed.

      record whose owner name matches the RDATA of the last CNAME record.
    * The owner name of the first CNAME record in the chain must match
      *Query Name*.
    * The last record in the chain must either be a CNAME or a record matching
      *Query Type*.
    * For each owner name of the CNAME records in the chain there must not be any
      additional records in the answer section with the same owner name besides
      RRSIG and NSEC records (that may exist).
  * CNAME records not part of a valid CNAME chain are by default ignored.

* Authority and additional sections are by default ignored.

> The test case specification may prescribe that CNAME records are handled in an a

Reviewer 2: typo: `an a` -> `a`

Author: Fixed.

items specified below. Unless specified in the test case specification, the items
in the response are handled using the default handling.

> |Response Item |Default handlin                  | Comment                                                        |

Author: Fixed.
